CPP-4070 S2807 Make rule SonarWay and enforce hidden friends and cover free func operators (#3954)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S2807/cfamily/rule.adoc

This rule raises issues for overloaded binary mathematical and relation operators that are not declared as hidden friends.

== Why is this an issue?

When overloading binary or relation operators, it is recommended that they be declared hidden friends of the class.
A hidden friend, i.e. friend function defined in the class body, provides the following benefits:

* in contrast to the member function, it allows conversion to be applied to both operands
* in contrast to free functions, it is considered only if one of the operands is an object of the given class

This rule raises issues for all overloaded binary:

* mathematical operators: `+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `%`, `^`, `&`, `|`, `<<`, `>>`
* until {cpp}20, all relational operators: `==`, `!=`, `<`, `>`, ``++<=++``, ``++>=++``
* since {cpp}20, non-members key relational operators: `==`, ``++<=>++``

> 

Author: I am hesitant to do so, because if you follow through that logic, we should actually suggest changing free overloads of `+=`, e.t.c. to members. I do not think that explaining the blocklist adds value.

[source,cpp]
----
struct MyClass {
  MyClass operator+(const MyClass& rhs) // Noncompliant
  { /* ... */ }
};

bool operator==(const MyClass &lhs, const MyClass& rhs) // Noncompliant
{ /* ... */ }
----

=== Why are hidden friends preferred over free functions?

> The overloaded operators that are declared as hidden friends are found only by argument-dependent lookup (ADL) for a given class.

Author: I do not think that we should introduce links in body. The resources section is for that purpose.

Approximately, this means that the hidden friend of class `C` is considered a candidate,
only if one of the arguments of the call is an object of type `C` or one derived from it.
In contrast, a free function is considered for any class declared in the same namespace.

For illustration, let's consider the following example which defines `operator/` as a free function.
[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
namespace lib {
  class Path {
  public:
    Path(char const*);
    Path(std::string_view);
    Path& operator/=(Path const&);
  };

  Path operator/(Path const& lhs, Path const& rhs) {
    auto result = lhs;
    result /= rhs;
    return lhs;
  }
}
----

The `operator/` will considered as a candidate for any call `a / b` where either `a` or `b` is namespace `lib`.
This not only makes compilation slower but also lists the function as a candidate in case of a compilation error,
making such a message less readable.

> Furthermore, when such an operator is visible via normal lookup, it may be invoked when both arguments are of the type that is convertible to `lib::Path`.

Author: Added link to resources.

  }
  void withUsing(std::string_view sv) {
    using namespace lib;
    sv / "dir"; // Compiles, converts both arg to lib::Path
  }
} // namespace otherNS
----

Such conversion for both arguments will not be allowed when the operator is declared as a hidden friend,
as none of the operands are of `lib::Path` type:

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
namespace lib {
  class Path {
  public:
    Path(char const*);
    Path(std::string_view);
    Path& operator/=(Path const&);

    friend Path operator/(Path const& lhs, Path const& rhs) {
      auto result = lhs;
      result /= rhs;
      return lhs;
    }
  };
}
----

=== Why are hidden friends preferred over member functions?

When the overloaded operator is declared as a member of the class,
it can be invoked only for the object of the class type or type that is derived from it.
These restrictions apply also when operator syntax (`a op b`) is used,
and disallows implicit conversion for left operands while allowing them for right operands.

For example, given the object `i` of class `Integer` that defines
`operator+` as a member:
[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
class Integer {
public:

>   Integer(long long int);

Author: This is equivalent to writing `unsigned` instead of `unsigned int,` and I prefer explicitness.

  Integer& operator+=(Integer const& other);
  Integer operator+(Integer const& rhs) const { // Noncompliant

>     return opertor+=(other);

Reviewer: It still does not compile -- this is const so can't call += on it.
The compliant solution is correct though.

  }
};
----
The call `i + 10` is well-formed and resolves to `i.operator(10)`,
which will convert `10` to an `Integer` object using the implicit converting constructor.
While `10 + i` is ill-formed.

In case if hidden friend function would be used, the expressions `i + 10` and `10 + i`,
would resolve to `operator+(i, 10)` and `operator+(10, i)` respectively,
allowing conversion to be performed for both operands.
[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=compliant]
----
class Integer {
public:
  Integer(long long int);
  Integer& operator+=(Integer const& other);
  friend Integer operator+(Integer const& lhs, Integer const& rhs) const { // Compliant
    Integer res;
    res += rhs;
    return res;
  }

> };

Author: Thanks, I forgot to assign `lhs` to res.

This rule raises issues for overloaded binary mathematical and relational operators that are not declared as hidden friends.

== Why is this an issue?

When overloading binary or relational operators, it is recommended that they be declared hidden friends of the class.
A hidden friend, i.e. a friend function defined in the class body, provides the following benefits:

* in contrast to the member function, it allows conversion to be applied to both operands
* in contrast to free functions, it is considered only if one of the operands is an object of the given class

> This rule raises issues for these overloaded binary:

Reviewer: I missed this one on my first pass:
```suggestion
This rule raises issues for these overloaded binary operators:
```

For example, given the object `i` of class `Integer` that defines
`operator+` as a member:
[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
class Integer {
public:
  Integer(long long int);
  Integer& operator+=(Integer const& rhs);
  Integer operator+(Integer const& rhs) const { // Noncompliant
    return opertor+=(rhs);
  }
};
----
The call `i + 10` is well-formed and resolves to `i.operator(10)`,
which will convert `10` to an `Integer` object using the implicit converting constructor.
However, `10 + i` is ill-formed.

If hidden friend functions were used, the expressions `i + 10` and `10 + i`,
would resolve to `operator+(i, 10)` and `operator+(10, i)` respectively,
allowing conversion to be performed symmetrically on the integer literal.
[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=compliant]
----
class Integer {
public:
  Integer(long long int);
  Integer& operator+=(Integer const& rhs);
  friend Integer operator+(Integer const& lhs, Integer const& rhs) { // Compliant
    Integer res = lhs;
    res += rhs;
    return res;
  }
};
----

=== Why relational operators are treated differently since {cpp}20?

> The {cpp}20 have introduced an tree-way comparison operator ``++<=>++`` (also know as spaceship),
> in addition to the mechanism that considers additional functions when interpreting relational operations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{cpp}20 has introduced a three-way comparison operator ``++<=>++`` (also known as spaceship)
in addition to the mechanism that considers additional functions when interpreting relational operations:
```

> * `a < b` (also `>`, ``++<=++`, ``++>=++``) is also interpreted as ``++operator<=>(a, b) < 0++``, ``++a.operator<=>(b) < 0++``, or ``++0 < operator<=>(b, a)++``, ``++0 < b.operator<=>(a)++``,

Reviewer: Fix for rendering issue
```suggestion
* `a < b` (also `>`, ``++<=++``, ``++>=++``) is also interpreted as ``++operator<=>(a, b) < 0++``, ``++a.operator<=>(b) < 0++``, or ``++0 < operator<=>(b, a)++``, ``++0 < b.operator<=>(a)++``,
```

* `a != b` is also intepreted as `!operator==(a, b)`, `!a.operator==(b)`, or `!operator==(b, a)`, `!b.operator==(a)`,
* `a == b` is also intepreted as `operator==(a, b)`, `a.operator==(b)`, or  `operator==(b, a)`, `b.operator==(a)`.

> Above mechanism, makes overloads for `!=`, `<`, `>`, ``++<=++``, ``++>=++`` replacable with ``++<=>++` and `==` (see S6187).

Reviewer: Fix for rendering issue
```suggestion
Above mechanism, makes overloads for `!=`, `<`, `>`, ``++<=++``, ``++>=++`` replacable with ``++<=>++`` and `==` (see S6187).
```

```suggestion
The above mechanism makes overloads for `!=`, `<`, `>`, ``++<=++``, ``++>=++`` replacable with ``++<=>++`` and `==` (see S6187).
```

> As these overloads usually will be removed, we do not suggest replacing them with hidden friends.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As these overloads will usually be removed, we do not suggest replacing them with hidden friends.
```

Additionally, such rewrites consider calls of overloads with the order of argument as spelled (`a`, `b`), and reversed (`b`, `a`).
This makes the behavior of expression consistent regardless of the order of operands.
Given the following example:

[source,cpp]
----
struct MyString {
  MyString(char const* cstr);
  bool operator==(MyString const& other) const;                  // Compliant since C++20: see below

>   std::strong_ordering operator<=>(MyString const& other) const; // Compliant: only available since C++20

Reviewer: These lines are very long and rendering may be suboptimal (requires scrolling). Maybe the comment can be put on a separate line. WDYT?

Author: Having the comment before. after in some examples would, for me, make it unclear where the comment is applying to. I have moved the return type to the previous line to make it shorter.

Reviewer: Works for me, thanks!

};

const MySting ms;
----

> The expression `ms == "Some string"` and `"SomeString" == ms` will both compile,
> and the latter will call `operator==` with the argument reversed.
> This removes the drawbacks of declaring such operators as members,
> and the issue is not raised for them in {cpp}20 or later mode.

Reviewer: Present tense seems more appropriate.
```suggestion
The expression `ms == "Some string"` and `"SomeString" == ms` both compile,
and the latter calls `operator==` with the argument reversed.
This removes the drawbacks of declaring all combinations of such operators as members,
and the issue is not raised for them for {cpp}20 and later.
```

Note, that hidden friends are still preferred over free functions:
[source,cpp]
----
struct MyString {
  MyString(char const* cstr);
};

bool operator==(MyString const& lhs, MyString const& rhs) const                   // Noncompliant
{ /* ... */ }
std::strong_ordering operator<=>(MyString const& lhs, MyString const& rhs) const  // Noncompliant

> { /* ... */ }

Reviewer: Ditto, those lines are very long and may require scrolling.

Author: Same as above.

  
  std::strong_ordering 
  operator<=>(MyString const& other) const; // Compliant: only available since C++20
};

const MySting ms;
----

The expression `ms == "Some string"` and `"SomeString" == ms` both compile,
and the latter calls `operator==` with the argument reversed.
This removes the drawbacks of declaring all combinations of such operators as members,
and the issue is not raised for them for {cpp}20 and later.

Note, that hidden friends are still preferred over free functions:
[source,cpp]
----
struct MyString {
  MyString(char const* cstr);
};

bool 
operator==(MyString const& lhs, MyString const& rhs)  // Noncompliant
{ /* ... */ }

std::strong_ordering 
operator<=>(MyString const& lhs, MyString const& rhs) // Noncompliant
{ /* ... */ }
----

== How to fix it

The issue can be fixed by declaring the operator to be declared as a hidden friend,
i.e., declaring it as a `friend` inside the class and inlining its function body.

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=3,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
struct IntWrapper {
  long i;
  MyClass operator+(const MyClass& rhs) const // Noncompliant

>   {

Reviewer: Nit: in terms of style, we usually put the open brace on the same line.

Author: I did this to improve the readability of the example. The 3 additional examples for some of these examples pushed the comment out of sight.

Author: I did this to improve the readability of the example. The 3 additional examples for some of these examples pushed the comment out of sight. The trailing requires clause makes it even harder to read, so I decided to put the body out of focus at the cost of an additional line.

Reviewer: I see, thanks. Makes sense.

    return MyClass{i + rhs.i}
  }
};
----

==== Compliant solution

> [source,cpp,diff-id=3,diff-type=noncompliant]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,cpp,diff-id=3,diff-type=compliant]
```

----
struct IntWrapper {
  long i;
  friend MyClass operator+(const MyClass& lhs, const MyClass& rhs) // Compliant
  {
    return Myclass{lhs.i + rhs.i}
  }
};
----

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=4,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
struct IntWrapper {
  long i;
};

MyClass operator+(const MyClass& lhs, const MyClass& rhs) // Noncompliant
{
  return Myclass{lhs.i + rhs.i}
}
----

==== Compliant solution

> [source,cpp,diff-id=4,diff-type=noncompliant]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,cpp,diff-id=4,diff-type=compliant]
```

----
struct IntWrapper {
  long i;
  friend MyClass operator+(const MyClass& lhs, const MyClass& rhs) // Compliant
  {
    return Myclass{lhs.i + rhs.i}
  }
};
----

=== How to handle operator with definition in source file

> To define a hidden friend, the overloaded operator needs to be defined in class.
> When the operator is defined in the source file, this may require moving its definition to the header file.
> In case of a complex implementation, this may be undesired or not possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To define a hidden friend, the overloaded operator needs to be defined in class.
If the operator is initially defined in the source file, it may be necessary to move its definition to the header file.
In complex implementations, this may be undesired or impossible.
```

==== Noncompliant code example

> [source,cpp,diff-id=4,diff-type=noncompliant]

Reviewer: diff-id 4 is already used.

Author: Fixed

----
// Header file
class Integer {
public:
  Integer(long long int);
  Integer operator+(Integer const& rhs) const; // Noncompliant
};

// Source file
Integer Integer::operator+(Integer const& rhs) const
{
  /* Complex logic */
}
----

To properly resolve such an issue, you may define a helper member function,
that will remain defined in the source file, and define the operator in terms of it.
For mathematical operators, this is usually achieved by defining them in terms of the corresponding compound assignment operator.

==== Compliant solution

> [source,cpp,diff-id=4,diff-type=compliant]

Reviewer: diff-id `4` is already used.

----
// Header file
class Integer {
public:
  Integer(long long int);
  Integer& operator+=(Integer const& rhs);
  friend Integer operator+(Integer const& lhs, Integer const& rhs) // Compliant
  {
    Integer result = lhs;
    result += rhs;
    return result;
  }
};

// Source file
Integer& Integer::operator+=(Integer const& rhs)
{
  /* Complex logic */
}
----

This has the additional benefit of reducing code duplication if both `operator+` and `operator+=` were already defined,

> or making the interface more consistent by providing compound assignment counterparts for each supported operator.

Reviewer: I would move the text into the "Compliant solution" subsection and move the text after the example before it to make the connection with the previous example more obvious and split the paragraph a bit differently.

WDYT of:?

i.e.

```
==== Compliant solution

To properly resolve such an issue, you may define a helper member function,
that will remain defined in the source file, and define the operator in terms of it.

For mathematical operators, this is usually achieved by defining them in terms of the corresponding compound assignment operator.
This has the additional benefit of reducing code duplication if both `operator+` and `operator+=` were already defined,
or making the interface more consistent by providing compound assignment counterparts for each supported operator.

[example]
```

Author: Makes sense.

> === How to handle operator template

Reviewer: I very much like this section! Nice example and good added value 👍

> When declaring a hidden friend for a class template, a separate friend function would be instantiated for each instantiation of the enclosing class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When declaring a hidden friend for a class template, a separate friend function is instantiated for each instantiation of the enclosing class.
```

When changing from a free overloaded operator template to a friend function, template parameters corresponding to the class should be removed.

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=5,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
template<typename CharT>
class StringRef {
public:
  StringRef(CharT const* str);

  int compare(StringRef other) const;
};

template<typename CharT>
bool operator==(StringRef<CharT> lhs, StringRef<CharT> rhs) // Noncompliant
{
  return lhs.compare(rhs) == 0;
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=5,diff-type=compliant]
----
template<typename CharT>
class StringRef {
public:
  StringRef(CharT const* str);

  int compare(StringRef other) const;

  friend bool operator==(StringRef lhs, StringRef rhs) // Compliant: separate overload for each instantiation of StringRef<CharT>
  {
    return lhs.compare(rhs) == 0;
  }
};
----

> Such solution has the additional benefit of allowing the operands to be converted (as the operator is no longer a template).
> This means that for `StringRef<char> sr`, the expression `sr == "Some string"` will compile and use the implicit constructor from `CharT const*`,
> alleviating the need to declare addtional overloads accepting `const CharT*`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Such a solution has the additional benefit of allowing the operands to be converted (as the operator is no longer a template).
This means that for `StringRef<char> sr`, the expression `sr == "Some string"` will compile and use the implicit constructor from `CharT const*`,
alleviating the need to declare additional overloads accepting `const CharT*`.
```

> In case when of heterogeneous operator, that accepts different specializations, only one set of template parameters should be removed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the case of heterogeneous operators that accept different specializations, only one set of template parameters should be removed:
```

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=6,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
template<typename T>
struct Optional {
  bool has_value() const;
  T const& value() const;
};

template<typename T>
  requires std::equality_comparable<T>
bool operator==(Optional<T> const& lhs, Optional<T> const& rhs) // Noncompliant
{
  if (lhs.has_value() && rhs.has_value()) {
    return lhs.value() == rhs.value();
  }
  return lhs.has_value() == rhs.has_value();
}

template<typename T, typename U>
  requires std::equality_comparable_with<T, U>
bool operator==(Optional<T> const& lhs, Optional<U> rhs) // Noncompliant
{
  if (lhs.has_value() && rhs.has_value()) {
    return lhs.value() == rhs.value();
  }
  return lhs.has_value() == rhs.has_value();
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=6,diff-type=compliant]
----
template<typename T>
struct Optional {
  bool has_value() const;
  T const& value() const;

>   friend bool operator==(Optional const& lhs, Optional<U> rhs) // Complaint: lhs and rhs are Optional<T>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  friend bool operator==(Optional const& lhs, Optional rhs) // Compliant: lhs and rhs are Optional<T>
```

    requires std::equality_comparable<T>
  {
    if (lhs.has_value() && rhs.has_value()) {
      return lhs.value() == rhs.value();
    }
    return lhs.has_value() == rhs.has_value();
  }

  template<typename U>
    requires std::equality_comparable_with<T, U>

>   friend bool operator==(Optional const& lhs, Optional<U> rhs) // Complaint: lhs is Optional<T>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  friend bool operator==(Optional const& lhs, Optional<U> rhs) // Compliant: lhs is Optional<T>
```

  {
    if (lhs.has_value() && rhs.has_value()) {
      return lhs.value() == rhs.value();
    }
    return lhs.has_value() == rhs.has_value();
  }
};
----

> ==== Compliant solution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

== Resources

=== Documentation

* {cpp} reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/lookup[Name lookup]
* {cpp} reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/adl[Argument-dependent lookup]

=== External coding guidelines

* {cpp} Core Guidelines - https://github.com/isocpp/CppCoreGuidelines/blob/e49158a/CppCoreGuidelines.md#c161-use-non-member-functions-for-symmetric-operators[C.161: Use non-member functions for symmetric operators]

=== Related rules

> * S6187 suggests replacing overloads of relation operators with `<=>`

Reviewer: Our [doc](https://github.com/SonarSource/rspec/blob/master/docs/link_formatting.adoc) says this should be `<rulenumber> - <title>`. I think this makes some sense since this is displayed in a separate tab (loss of context).

=== Why are hidden friends preferred over free functions?

The overloaded operators that are declared as hidden friends are found only by argument-dependent lookup (ADL) for a given class.

> Roughtly, this means that the hidden friend of class `C` is considered a candidate

Reviewer: And apparently I cannot spell `roughly` correctly in my suggestions...
```suggestion
Roughly, this means that the hidden friend of class `C` is considered a candidate
```
